Introduction 
For Hush Puppies — the classic American 
brushed-suede shoes with the lightweight crepe 
sole —- the Tipping Point came somewhere 
between late 1994 and early 1995. The brand 
had been all but dead until that point. Sales were down to 
30,000 pairs a year, mostly to backwoods outlets and 
small-town family stores. Wolverine, the company that 
makes Hush Puppies, was thinking of phasing out the 
shoes that made them famous. But then something strange 
happened. At a fashion shoot, two Hush Puppies execu 
tives — Owen Baxter and Geoffrey Lewis — ran into a 
stylist from New York who told them that the classic 
Hush Puppies had suddenly become hip in the clubs and 
bars of downtown Manhattan. "We were being told," Bax 
ter recalls, "that there were resale shops in the Village, 
in Soho, where the shoes were being sold. People were 
going to the Ma and Pa stores, the little stores that still 
carried them, and buying them up." Baxter and Lewis 
4 THE TIPPING POINT 
were baffled at first. It made no sense to them that shoes 
that were so obviously out of fashion could make a come 
back. "We were told that Isaac Mizrahi was wearing the 
shoes himself," Lewis says. "I think it's fair to say thai at 
the time we had no idea who Isaac Mizrahi was." 
By the fall of 1995, things began to happen in a rush. 
first the designer John Bartlctt called. He wanted to use 
I lush Puppies in his spring collection. Then another Man 
hattan designer, Anna Sui, called, wanting shoes for her 
show as well. In Los Angeles, the designer Joel Fitzgerald 
put a twenty-five-foot inflatable basset hound — the sym 
bol of the Hush Puppies brand — on the roof of his Hol 
lywood store and gutted an adjoining art gallery to turn it 
into a Hush Puppies boutique. While he was still painting 
and putting up shelves, the actor Pee-wee Herman walked 
in and asked for a couple of pairs. "It was total word of 
mouth," Fitzgerald remembers. 
In 1995, the company sold 450,000 pairs of the classic 
Hush Puppies, and the next year it sold lour times that, 
and the year after that still more, until Hush Puppies were 
once again a staple of the wardrobe of the young Ameri 
can male. In 1996, Hush Puppies won the prize for best 
accessory at the Council of Fashion Designers awards din-
 ner at Lincoln Center, and the president of the firm stood 
up On the stage with Calvin Klein and Donna Karan and 
accepted an award for an achievement that — as he would 
be the first to admit — his company had almost nothing to 
do with. Hush Puppies had suddenly exploded, and it all 
started with a handful of kids in the East Village and Soho. 
How did that happen? Those first few kids, whoever 
they were, weren't deliberately trying to promote Hush 
INTRODUCTION 5 
Puppies. They were wearing them precisely because no 
one else would wear them. Then the fad spread to two 
fashion designers who used the shoes to peddle something 
else — haute couture. The shoes were an incidental touch. 
No one was trying to make Hush Puppies a trend. Yet, 
somehow, that's exactly what happened. The shoes passed 
a certain point in popularity and they tipped. How docs a 
thirty-dollar pair of shoes go from a handful of downtown 
Manhattan hipsters and designers to every mall in America 
in the space of two years? 
1. 
There was a time, not very long ago, in the desperately 
poor New York City neighborhoods of Brownsville and 
East New York, when the streets would turn into ghost 
towns at dusk. Ordinary working people wouldn't walk 
on the sidewalks. Children wouldn't ride their bicycles on 
the streets. Old folks wouldn't sit on stoops and park 
benches. The drug trade ran so rampant and gang warfare 
was so ubiquitous in that part of Brooklyn that most peo 
ple would take to the safety of their apartment at nightfall. 
Police officers who served in Brownsville in the 1980s and 
early 1990s say that, in those years, as soon as the sun went 
down their radios exploded with chatter between beat 
officers and their dispatchers over every conceivable kind 
of violent and dangerous crime. In 1992, there were 2,154 
murders in New York City and 626,182 serious crimes, 
with the weight of those crimes falling hardest in places 
like Brownsville and Hast New York. But then something 
strange happened. At some mysterious and critical point. 
6 THE TIPPING POINT 
the crime rate began to turn. It tipped. Within five' years, 
murders had dropped 64.3 percent to 770 and total crimes 
had fallen by almost half to 355,893. In Brownsville and 
East New York, the sidewalks filled up again, the bicycles 
came back, and old folks reappeared on the stoops. "There 
was a time when it wasn't uncommon to hear rapid tire, 
like you would hear somewhere in the jungle in Vietnam," 
says Inspector Edward Messadri, who commands the 
police precinct in Brownsville. "I don't hear the gunfire 
anymore." 
The New York City police will tell you that what 
happened in New York was that the city's policing strate 
gies dramatically improved. Criminologists point to the 
decline of the crack trade and the aging of the population. 
Economists, meanwhile, say that the gradual improve 
ment in the city's economy over the course of the 1990s 
had the effect of employing those who might otherwise 
have become criminals. These are the conventional expla 
nations for the rise and fall of social problems, but in the 
end none is any more satisfying than the statement that 
kids in the East Village caused the Hush Puppies revival. 
The changes in the drug trade, the population, and the 
economy are all long-term trends, happening all Over the 
country. They don't explain why crime plunged in New 
York City so much more than in other cities around the 
country, and they don't explain why it all happened in 
such an extraordinarily short time. As for the improve 
ments made by the police, they are important too. But 
there is a puzzling gap between the scale of the changes 
in policing and the size of the effect on places like 
Brownsville and East New York. After all, crime didn't 
INTRODUCTION 7 
just slowly ebb in New York as conditions gradually 
improved. It plummeted. How can a change in a handful 
of economic and social indices cause murder rates to fall 
by two-thirds in five years? 
2. 
The Tipping Point is the biography of an idea, and the idea 
is very simple. It is that the best way to understand the 
emergence of fashion trends, the ebb and How of crime 
waves, or, for that matter, the transformation ot unknown 
books into bestsellers, or the rise of teenage smoking, or 
the phenomena of word of mouth, or any number of the 
other mysterious changes that mark everyday life is to 
think of them as epidemics. Ideas and products and mes 
sages and behaviors spread just like viruses do. 
The rise of Hush Puppies and the fall of New York's 
crime rate are textbook examples of epidemics in action. 
Although they may sound as if they don't have very much 
in common, they share a basic, underlying pattern. First of 
all, they are clear examples of contagious behavior. No one 
took out an advertisement and told people that the tradi 
tional Hush Puppies were cool and they should start wear 
ing them. Those kids simply wore the shoes when they went 
to clubs or cafes or walked the streets of downtown New 
York, and in so doing exposed other people to their fashion 
sense. They infected them with the Hush Puppies "virus." 
The crime decline in New York surely happened the 
same way. It wasn't that some huge percentage ol would-
 be murderers suddenly sat up in 1993 and decided not 
to commit any more crimes. Nor was it that the police 
8 THE TIPPING POINT 
managed magically to intervene in a huge percentage of 
situations that would otherwise have turned deadly. What 
happened is that the small number of people in the small 
number of situations in which the police or the new social 
forces had some impact started behaving very differently, 
and thai behavior somehow spread to other would-be 
criminals in similar situations. Somehow a large number ol 
people in New York got "infected" with an anti-crime 
virus in a short, time. 
The second distinguishing characteristic of these two 
examples is that in both cases little changes had big clfccts. 
All of the possible reasons for why New York's crime rate 
dropped are changes that happened at the margin; they 
were incremental changes. The crack trade leveled off. The 
population got a little older. The police force got a little 
better. Yet the effect was dramatic. So too with Hush Pup 
pies. How many kids are we talking about who began 
wearing the shoes in downtown Manhattan? Twenty? 
Fifty? One hundred — at the most? Yet their actions seem 
to have single-handedly started an international fashion 
trend. 
Finally, both changes happened in a hurry. They didn't 
build steadily and slowly. It is instructive to look at a chart 
of the crime rate in New York City from, say, the mid-
 1960s to the late 1990s. It looks like a giant arch. In 1965, 
there were 200,000 crimes in the city and Irom that point 
on the number begins a sharp rise, doubling in two years 
and continuing almost unbroken until it hits 650,000 
crimes a year in the mid-1970s. It stays steady at that level 
for the next two decades, before plunging downward in 
1992 as sharply as it rose thirty years earlier. Crime did not 
INTRODUCTION 9 
taper off. It didn't gently decelerate. It hit a certain point 
and jammed on the brakes. 
These three characteristics — one, contagiousness; two, 
the fact that little causes can have big effects; and three, 
that change happens not gradually but at one dramatic 
moment — are the same three principles that define how 
measles moves through a grade-school classroom or the 
flu attacks every winter. Of the three, the third trait — 
the idea that epidemics can rise or fall in one dramatic 
moment — is the most important, because it is the prin 
ciple that makes sense of the first two and that permits the 
greatest insight into why modern change happens the way 
it does. The name given to that one dramatic moment in an 
epidemic when everything can change all at once is the 
Tipping Point. 
3. 
A world that follows the rules of epidemics is a very dif 
ferent place from the world we think we live in now. 
Think, for a moment, about the concept of contagious 
ness. If I say that word to you, you think of colds and the 
flu or perhaps something very dangerous like HIV or 
Ebola. We have, in our minds, a very specific, biological 
notion of what contagiousness means. But if there can be 
epidemics of crime or epidemics of fashion, there must be 
all kinds of things just as contagious as viruses. Have you 
ever thought about yawning, for instance? Yawning is a 
surprisingly powerful act. Just because you read the word 
"yawning" in the previous two sentences — and the two 
additional "yawns" in this sentence — a good number of 
10 THE TIPPING POINT 
you will probably yawn within the next few minutes. Even 
as I'm writing this, I've yawned twice. If you're reading 
this in a public place, and you've just yawned, chances are 
that a good proportion of everyone who saw you yawn is 
now yawning too, and a good proportion of the people 
watching the people who watched you yawn are now 
yawning as well, and on and on, in an ever-widening, 
yawning circle. 
Yawning is incredibly contagious. I made some of you 
reading this yawn simply by writing the word "yawn." 
The people who yawned when they saw you yawn, mean 
while, were infected by the sight of you yawning — which 
is a second kind of contagion. They might even have 
yawned if they only heard you yawn, because yawning 
is also aurally contagious: if you play an audiotape of 
a yawn to blind people, they'll yawn too. And finally, if 
you yawned as you read this, did the thought cross your 
mind — however unconsciously and fleetingly — that you 
might be tired? I suspect that for some of you it did, which 
means that yawns can also be emotionally contagious. 
Simply by writing the word, I can plant a feeling in your 
mind. Can the flu virus do that? Contagiousness, in other 
words, is an unexpected property of all kinds of things, 
and we have to remember that, if we are to recognize and 
diagnose epidemic change. 
The second of the principles of epidemics — that little 
changes can somehow have big effects — is also a fairly 
radical notion. We are, as humans, heavily socialized to 
make a kind of rough approximation between cause and 
effect. If we want to communicate a strong emotion, if 
we want to convince someone that, say, we love them, we 
INTRODUCTION 11 
realize that we need to speak passionately and forthrightly. 
If we want to break bad news to someone, we lower our 
voices and choose our words carefully. We are trained to 
think that what goes into any transaction or relationship 
or system must be directly related, in intensity and dimen 
sion, to what comes out. Consider, for example, the fol 
lowing puzzle. I give you a large piece of paper, and I ask 
you to fold it over once, and then take that folded paper 
and fold it over again, and then again, and again, until you 
have refolded the original paper 50 times. How tall do you 
think the final stack is going to be? In answer to that ques 
tion, most people will fold the sheet in their mind's eye, 
and guess that the pile would be as thick as a phone book 
or, if they're really courageous, they'll say that it would be 
as tall as a refrigerator. But the real answer is that the 
height of the stack would approximate the distance to the 
sun. And if you folded it over one more time, the stack 
would be as high as the distance to the sun and back. This 
is an example of what in mathematics is called a geometric 
progression. Epidemics are another example of geometric 
progression: when a virus spreads through a population, 
it doubles and doubles again, until it has (figuratively) 
grown from a single sheet of paper all the way to the sun m 
fifty steps. As human beings we have a hard time with this 
kind of progression, because the end result — the effect — 
seems far out of proportion to the cause. To appreciate the 
power of epidemics, we have to abandon this expectation 
about proportionality. We need to prepare ourselves for 
the possibility that sometimes big changes follow from 
small events, and that sometimes these changes can happen 
very quickly. 
t ' THE TIPPING POINT 
This possibility of sudden change is at the center of the 
idea of the Tipping Point and might well be the hardest 
of all to accept. The expression first came into popular 
use in the 1970s to describe the flight to the suburbs of 
whites living in the older cities of the American Northeast. 
When the number of incoming African Americans in 
a particular neighborhood reached a certain point—20 
percent, say — sociologists observed that the community 
would "tip": most of the remaining whites would leave 
almost immediately. The Tipping Point is the moment of 
critical mass, the threshold, the boiling point. There was a 
Tipping Point for violent crime in New York in the early 
1990s, and a Tipping Point for the reemergence of Hush 
Puppies, just as there is a Tipping Point for the introduction 
of any new technology. Sharp introduced the first low-
 priced fax machine in 1984, and sold about 80,000 of those 
machines in the United States in that first year. For the 
next three years, businesses slowly and steadily bought 
more and more faxes, until, in 1987, enough people had 
faxes that it made sense for everyone to get a fax. Nineteen 
eighty-seven was the fax machine Tipping Point. A million 
machines were sold that year, and by 1989 two million 
new machines had gone into operation. Cellular phones 
have followed the same trajectory. Through the 1990s, 
they got smaller and cheaper, and service got better until 
1998, when the technology hit a Tipping Point and sud 
denly everyone had a cell phone. (For an explanation of 
the mathematics of Tipping Points, see the Endnotes-) 
All epidemics have Tipping Points. Jonathan Crane, 
a sociologist at the University of Illinois, has looked at 
the effect the number of role models in a community — 
INTRODUCTION 13 
the professionals, managers, teachers whom the Census 
Bureau has defined as "high status" — has on the lives of 
teenagers in the same neighborhood. He found little 
difference in pregnancy rates or school drop-out rates 
in neighborhoods of between 40 and 5 percent of high-
 status workers. But when the number of profes 
sionals dropped below 5 percent, the problems exploded. 
For black schoolchildren, for example, as the percentage 
of high-status workers falls just 2.2 percentage points — 
from 5.6 percent to 3.4 percent — drop-out rates more 
than double. At the same lipping Point, the rales of child-
 bearing for teenaged girls — which barely move at all up 
to that point — nearly double. We assume, intuitively, that 
neighborhoods and social problems decline in some kind 
of steady progression. But sometimes they may not 
decline steadily at all; at the Tipping Point, schools can 
lose control of their students, and family life can disinte 
grate all at once. 
1 remember once as a child seeing our family's puppy 
encounter snow (or the first time. He was shocked and 
delighted and overwhelmed, wagging his tail nervously, 
sniffing about in this strange, fluffy substance, whimper 
ing with the mystery of it all. It wasn't much colder on the 
morning of his first snowfall than it had been the evening 
before. It might have been 34 degrees the previous 
evening, and now it was 31 degrees. Almost nothing had 
changed, in other words, yet — and this was the amazing 
thing — everything had changed. Rain had become some 
thing entirely different. Snow! We are all, at heart, gradu 
alists, our expectations set bv the steady passage of time. 
But the world of the Tipping Point is a place where the 
M THE TIPPING POINT 
unexpected becomes expected, where radical change is 
more than possibility. It is — contrary to all our expecta 
tions — a certainty. 
In pursuit of this radical idea, I'm going to take you to 
Baltimore, to learn from the epidemic of syphilis in that 
city. I'm going to introduce three fascinating kinds of 
people I call Mavens, Connectors, and Salesmen, who play 
a critical role in the word-of-mouth epidemics that dictate 
our tastes and trends and fashions. I'll take you to the set 
of the children's shows Sesame Street and Blue's Clues and 
into the fascinating world of the man who helped to create 
the Columbia Record Club to look at how messages can 
be structured to have the maximum possible impact on all 
their audience. I'll take you to a high-tech company in 
Delaware to talk about the Tipping Points that govern 
group life and to the subways of New York City to under 
stand how the crime epidemic was brought to an end 
there. The point of all of this is to answer two simple ques 
tions that lie at the heart of what we would ail like to 
accomplish as educators, parents, marketers, business 
people, and policymakers. Why is it that some ideas or 
behaviors or products start epidemics and others don't? 
And what can we do to deliberately start and control posi 
tive epidemics of our own? 